In this section,
we're going to review an open-source project called WireMock
that enables us to test our inventory service without actually
connecting to a real back-end server.
WireMock allows you to stub HTTP responses for use in test environments,
as well as unit tests.
It has many uses and benefits,
but there are three specific use cases for which I've
adopted WireMock in my projects.
First, stubs.
WireMock can be used to provide stubs for services that don't yet exist.
For example,
if you're building a large-scale application with
many teams working in parallel,
you could pretty easily find yourself working in a pipeline,
waiting for other teams to deliver their services
before you can implement your own.
With WireMock, you can agree on the interface that a service will support,
and then work against a stub so the development is not blocked.
This is one of the ways that we'll be using WireMock in
the inventory management system because,
well, that service doesn't currently exist.
Next,
you can write unit tests for services that make web service calls
by pointing those services to WireMock in your test cases and
returning a known set of responses.
This allows you to test successful code paths,
as well as edge cases,
such as requesting information about a missing product
or simulating authentication errors.
Finally,
WireMock can be used as a man in the middle to record service call requests
and responses and then play them back for testing purposes.
We use this often at my company, and when we find a new and unique environment,
we build new unit tests that use those recordings.
To use WireMock,
we create a WireMock server in our unit test and configure
the request that we would like to handle and the responses
to return for those requests.
WireMock has a pretty natural-looking set of classes that make
this configuration very straightforward.
We will configure the inventory service's URL to point to the WireMock server
and then WireMock will return the configured responses.
Alternatively, WireMock supports mapping files.
A mapping file defines the request to handle and the responses to return.
Typically, inside the mapping file,
the response points to a file in the __files directory that
contains the payload to return as the response body.
I'll show you how to use both approaches in the coming example.
In the InventoryServiceTest class,
we define a WireMockServer instance and then before
each test runs we create the instance, start it,
and then configure the request and responses that we want to handle.
And then after each test case,
we stop the WireMockServer so that we have a clean environment for each test.
Let's take a look at the source code for the
InventoryServiceTest class and see how it works.
The InventoryServiceTest is annotated with the SpringBootTest annotation,
as well as the TestPropertySource annotation.
The TestPropertySource annotation allows you to define the
property files to use for this test class.
Properties that are defined in these properties files will
override properties defined elsewhere.
In this example, we have a single properties file,
namely test.properties,
which overrides our inventory baseUrl property to
point to localhost 9999/inventory.
This will match the URL for the WireMockServer that
we'll create in our test class.
The InventoryServiceTest has wired into it the
InventoryService that we want to test, and it defines a WireMockServer variable.
In the BeforeEach method,
we create an instance of the WireMockServer listening on port 9999,
and start it,
then we configure the request that we want to handle
and the corresponding responses.
I have statically imported a host of methods that
make this handling easy to read.
The first request we want to handle reads like this: In the WireMockServer,
create a stub for the case of a get request with a urlEqualTo /inventory/1.
When this URL is invoked,
the WireMockServer will return a response with a header of
Content-Type set to application/json with a status of 200,
and with a body that is found in the json/inventory- response.json file.
From a more technical perspective, the stubFor method accepts a mapping builder,
which follows the builder design pattern to build a
mapping from a request to a response.
The get method handles an HTTP request and accepts a URL
pattern to match for that request.
The urlEqualTo method produces a URL pattern that performs an
equality comparison against its argument,
namely, /inventory/1.
So essentially, we're matching a GET HTTP request to the exact URL /inventory/1.
The next step in configuring the mapping builder is to tell it
what to do when it receives the request.
The willReturn method accepts aResponse definition builder that also
follows the builder design pattern to define the response.
AResponse is a static method that creates a new response definition builder
that can then be configured with its various with methods.
The withHeader method sets the header key values,
which sets the Content-Type to application/json in this example.
The withStatus method sets the HTTP status code for the response,
which is 200 in this example,
and the withBodyFile method sets the body of the
response to the contents of a file,
which is json/inventory- response.json in this example.
The inventory- response.json file contains an
inventory record with a productId of 1, a quantity of 500,
a productName of Super Great Product, and a productCategory of Great Products.
The next request we want to handle is for a get request to the /inventory/2 URL.
In this case, the wireMockServer will return a status code of 404 NotFound.
Finally,
we configure the WireMockServer to create a stub for a post request to
/inventory/1/purchaseRecord with a Content-Type containing
application/json and a body containing product:1 to return a response
with a Content-Type of application/json,
a 200 OK HTTP response code,
and the body that's contained in the
json/inventory-response-after- post.json file.
The containing method accepts a regular expression
string that we want to match on.
We use this with our request Content-Type because Spring
actually returns application/json;charset=UTF-8,
and we'll use it with our request body just to validate that
the body contains the string product:1.
These are both optional,
but if we were posting multiple payloads to this same URL,
then this would allow us to differentiate between different posts
and potentially return a different response body.
The inventory-response-after- post.json file looks just
like the inventory- response.json file,
but it now has a quantity set to 499 instead of 500.
In the AfterEach method,
we stop the WireMockServer so that subsequent tests
have a clean environment to work with.
The first test method that we create is testGetInventoryRecordSuccess.
This test invokes the inventoryService's
getInventoryRecord method with an argument of 1,
which will resolve to a get request to /inventory/1.
WireMock will return the contents of the inventory-
response.json file to the service, which it returns as an InventoryRecord object.
We first verify that the response is present,
and then we compare the quantity in the response to 500.
The next method is testGetInventoryRecordNotFound.
This method invokes the inventory service's
getInvetoryRecord method with an argument of 2,
which resolves to a GET request to /inventory/2.
But we configured the WireMockServer to return a 404 NotFound response code.
So in this case,
we test the returned Optional InventoryRecord and
validate that it's not present.
Finally,
the testPurchaseProductSuccess method invokes the
inventory service's purchaseProduct method,
passing a product ID of 1, and a quantity of 1,
meaning that we just purchased 1 unit of product 1.
This will resolve to a post to /inventory/1/purchaseRecord,
which is configured in WireMock to return the contents of the
inventory-response-after- post.json file.
We validate that a response is returned by the service
and check that the quantity is now 499.
So I hope you can appreciate what WireMock is doing for us here.
The inventoryService is making actual HTTP calls using a Spring RestTemplate,
and because we changed its baseUrl property,
it's making those HTTP calls against WireMock,
and WireMock is configured in the BeforeEach method to return
specific JSON responses back to the inventory service.
The last thing that we want to look at are mapping files.
The syntax for defining our WireMock requests and
responses is clean and easy to read, but it would be nice to externalize those,
and that's the role of mapping files.
Our first mapping file, which is located in src/test/resources/mapping,
defines a request and response.
The request has a method, which is GET, and has a URL pattern,
which is /inventory/1.
When the WireMockServer receives this request,
then we configure it to return the specified response.
The response contains a status code of 200,
a headers section that defines the Content-Type to be application/json,
and bodyFileName that references the same json/inventory-
response.json file that we configured manually.
The second mapping file defines that a GET request to
/inventory/2 should return a 404 response code.
The final mapping file defines that a POST to
/inventory/1/purchaseRecord should return a 200 response code,
a JSON Content-Type,
and the body that's contained in the inventory-response-after- post.json file.
These three mapping files do the same thing that we
did manually in our source code.
I added a new InventoryServiceMappingTest class that performs
the exact same test that we just looked at,
but removes the manual request response configuration.
When the WireMockServer starts, it automatically looks in the mapping directory,
finds these mapping files,
and configures the request and responses based on the mapping files.
So the choice is yours.
You can manually configure requests and responses in your
code or you can use the mapping files. It all depends on what you're move comfortable with.